.. include:: substitutions.rst

Implementation, Results and Discussion
======================================

Implementation and Methodology
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

While the provided text describes the inner workings of the AODV routing protocol, it doesn't delve into the design of a specific study that evaluates or implements AODV in a MANET environment. Research papers investigating AODV's performance typically involve setting up a network, configuring AODV on the participating nodes, and measuring its effectiveness under various conditions. This research methodology would be considered an original study if it focuses solely on AODV. However, the text might also reference existing research papers that evaluated other routing protocols (replica studies) if it compares AODV's performance to alternative approaches.

To assess AODV's effectiveness, researchers often leverage network simulators like ns-2 or OMNeT++. These software tools allow for the creation of virtual MANETs, enabling researchers to control network conditions and measure various parameters related to AODV's performance. Alternatively, real-world testbeds with mobile devices can be used for evaluation, although this approach can be more complex and expensive to set up.

When evaluating AODV, researchers typically focus on key parameters such as Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR). This metric indicates the percentage of data packets that are successfully delivered to their intended destinations. Another important parameter is End-to-End Delay, which measures the average time it takes for a data packet to travel from the source node to the destination node. Additionally, researchers might assess the Control Overhead generated by the protocol, which refers to the amount of routing control traffic it produces. Convergence Time, the time it takes for the network to discover a new route after a link breaks, is another relevant parameter for evaluating AODV's adaptability in dynamic environments.

To ensure the reliability of their results, researchers would typically run simulations or experiments multiple times under varying network conditions. These conditions could include factors like the number of nodes in the network (node density), the movement patterns of the nodes, and the amount of traffic flowing through the network. By repeating the evaluation process under various scenarios and employing statistical analysis, researchers can calculate confidence intervals. These intervals provide a measure of how much the results might vary if the experiment were repeated, enhancing the overall trustworthiness of the findings.

By incorporating these details, future discussions can explore how researchers would design and conduct a structured study to evaluate AODV's performance in a MANET environment


Results
~~~~~~~~

This section presents the findings from a series of simulations designed to evaluate the scalability of the Ad hoc On-Demand Distance Vector (AODV) routing protocol in Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks (MANETs). Pytest was used to orchestrate the simulations, executing tests with varying network sizes: 10 nodes (small-scale), 100 nodes (medium-scale), and 1000 nodes (large-scale). The primary objective was to assess how AODV's performance changes as the network grows larger.

Metrics:

Three key metrics were evaluated:

* **Packet Delivery Ratio** (PDR): The percentage of data packets successfully delivered to their intended destinations.
* **End-to-End Delay**: The average time taken for a data packet to travel from the source node to the destination node.
* **Routing Overhead**: The amount of control traffic generated by AODV, measured as the average number of nodes a message is forwarded to during route discovery or maintenance.

Analysis
~~~~~~~~

This section analyzes the findings from the AODV scalability simulations conducted with Pytest. 
The tests were successfully executed for network sizes of 10 nodes (small-scale) and 100 nodes (medium-scale), 
providing insights into AODV's behavior under varying network conditions.

**Route Discovery and Flooding**:

As expected, the simulations observed that when a source node initiates communication with a destination in an unknown network topology (no established route), the Route Request (RREQ) messages trigger a flooding mechanism. This means the RREQ packets are propagated by each node to its neighbors, effectively broadcasting the request throughout the network. This behavior is essential for route discovery in AODV, allowing intermediate nodes to determine if they can participate in establishing a path to the destination.

**Route Establishment and Efficiency**:

However, the simulations also revealed a key efficiency gain once a route is established. After a suitable route is discovered and the Route Reply (RREP) message reaches the source node, subsequent data transmissions utilize this established path. This eliminates the need for further flooding. The RREP message travels back along the shortest route identified during the discovery process, ensuring efficient data transfer between the source and destination.

**Scalability Challenges**:

The analysis of the three key metrics (Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR), End-to-End Delay, and Routing Overhead) across different network sizes revealed potential scalability challenges for AODV in very large-scale MANETs. While the simulations with 10 and 100 nodes functioned successfully, the observed increase in routing overhead with network size suggests that flooding might become more problematic in denser environments. This excessive message propagation could contribute to decreased PDR due to resource limitations and increased delays as the network becomes congested.

Discussion
~~~~~~~~~~

These findings highlight a trade-off between route discovery efficiency and scalability in AODV.
The initial flooding during route discovery is necessary for AODV to function in dynamic network topologies. 
However, in very large-scale MANETs, this flooding behavior might lead to inefficiencies and performance degradation.

**Future Research Directions**:

The results suggest several avenues for further research:

* Mitigating Flooding: Exploring techniques to optimize route discovery in AODV, potentially reducing the reliance on flooding in large networks while maintaining efficient route establishment.
* Alternative Protocols: Investigating routing protocols specifically designed for scalability in dense mobile networks, potentially offering better performance in large-scale MANET deployments.
* Hybrid Approaches: Researching hybrid routing protocols that combine AODV's strengths with other protocols better suited for large-scale environments.

By addressing these challenges, researchers can develop routing solutions that are more efficient and scalable for diverse MANET deployments

Further Research
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These results highlight the need for further investigation into techniques to mitigate flooding in AODV, particularly for large-scale MANET deployments. Additionally, exploring alternative routing protocols specifically designed for scalability in dense mobile networks could be a valuable area of research.




.. 
  [Shuttleworth2016] M. Shuttleworth. (2016) Writing methodology. `Online <https://explorable.com/writing-methodology>`_.